This EDI data package contains instructional materials necessary to teach Macrosystems EDDIE Module 7: Using Data to Improve Ecological Forecasts, a ~3-hour educational module for undergraduates. Ecological forecasting is an emerging approach that provides an estimate of the future state of an ecological system with uncertainty, allowing society to prepare for changes in important ecosystem services. To be useful for management, ecological forecasts need to be both accurate enough for managers to be able to rely on them for decision-making and include a representation of forecast uncertainty, so managers can properly interpret the probability of future events. To improve forecast accuracy, forecasts can be updated with observational data once they become available, a process known as data assimilation. Recent improvements in environmental sensor technology and an increase in the number of sensors deployed in ecosystems have increased the availability of data for assimilation to develop and improve forecasts for natural resource management. In this module, students will explore how assimilating data with different amounts of observation uncertainty and at different temporal frequencies affects forecasts of lake water quality, using data from the U.S. National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON). The flexible, three-part (A-B-C) structure of this module makes it adaptable to a range of student levels and course structures. There are two versions of the module: an R Shiny application which does not require students to code, and an RMarkdown version which requires students to read and alter R code to complete module activities. The R Shiny application is published to shinyapps.io and is available at the following link: https://macrosystemseddie.shinyapps.io/module7/. GitHub repositories are available for both the R Shiny (https://github.com/MacrosystemsEDDIE/module7) and RMarkdown versions (https://github.com/MacrosystemsEDDIE/module7_R) of the module, and both code repositories have been published with DOIs to Zenodo (R Shiny version at DOI 10.5281/zenodo.10903839 and RMarkdown version at DOI 10.5281/zenodo.10909589). Readers are referred to the module landing page for additional information (https://serc.carleton.edu/eddie/teaching_materials/modules/module7.html). 