MODULE DEVELOPMENT AND TESTING
Module teaching materials were developed primarily by C.C. Carey and K.J. Farrell to provide instructors of undergraduate ecology courses with a ready-to-use, adaptable module that could be implemented in a 3-4 hour time period. 

As the second module within the suite of Macrosystems EDDIE (www.macrosystemseddie.org) teaching materials, this module was developed to teach students fundamental concepts about macrosystems ecology, and how a macrosystems approach can be used to understand how lakes are affected by drivers that operate on multiple, interconnected temporal and spatial scales. As a secondary goal, Macrosystems EDDIE modules introduce students to advanced computational tools as a way to manage, analyze, visualize, and interpret high-frequency and long-term ecological data sets. 

The specific student learning goals for this module are that by the end of the module, students will be able to: 
- Understand the concepts of macrosystems ecology and cross-scale interactions, and how different ecological processes can interact at local, regional, and continental scales. 
- Simulate phytoplankton blooms in multiple lakes using ecosystem models of lake water quality set up with publicly-available high-frequency sensor datasets (Activity A).
- Test the effects of a climate scenario on the different lake models, and examine how the timing and intensity of phytoplankton blooms change with climate warming (Activity B). 
- Examine the effects of both local nutrient loading and regional climate forcing to determine how factors acting at different scales interact to affect the intensity and timing of phytoplankton blooms (Activity C).
- Predict how lake phytoplankton blooms may respond globally to changing climate and land use.

The module was assessed by volunteer faculty testers during the 2017-2018 and 2018-2019 academic years. Faculty testers provided feedback that was used to update and optimize teaching materials. Carey and Farrell also used student pre- and post-module assessment questions to gauge effectiveness of teaching materials for achieving module learning goals. Pedagogical specialists with the Science Education Resource Center at Carleton College assisted with assessment development and implementation.

UNDERLYING MODEL DATA
The module uses the General Lake Model (GLM; Hipsey et al. 2014), an open-source hydrodynamic simulation model, to simulate lake temperatures and other physical limnology metrics over the model time period. The GLM model is paired with the Aquatic Ecodynamics library (AED; Hipsey et al. 2013) to simulate chemical and biological dynamics in the lake. GLM-AED in this module (version 2.2.0rc5) uses the 'GLMr' and 'glmtools' packages (Read and Winslow 2016, Winslow and Read 2016), which allow the GLM model to be run and output analyzed through the R statistical environment. The module includes datasets for two lakes that are part of the Global Lakes Ecological Observatory Network (GLEON; http://gleon.org/), Lake Mendota (Wisconsin, USA) and Lake Sunapee (New Hampshire, USA). The model representation of each lake has been simplified in multiple ways for the purpose of teaching this module: for example, while both Lake Mendota and Lake Sunapee have multiple surface inflows, they have been simplified to one inflow in the model. 
 
Within the module, lake configuration files (glm2.nml, aed2.nml, aed2_phyto_pars.nml, aed2_zoop_pars.nml) have been coarsely calibrated for each lake. Meteorological driver data (met_hourly.csv) for each lake were compiled at an hourly time step from the North American Land Data Assimilation System (NLDAS-2; Cosgrove et al. 2003) and include air temperature, short and long wave radiation, relative humidity, wind speed, and precipitation (rain and snow). Variations of the met_hourly.csv file were created to simulate different air temperature warming scenarios; files appended with "_plus2", "_plus4", and "_plus6" have air temperatures 2, 4, or 6 degrees Celsius warmer, respectively, than the observed air temperature for each hour included in met_hourly.csv. Simplified surface water inflow files (inflow.csv) for each lake were based on existing GLM model calibrations for Lake Mendota and Lake Sunapee, and include discharge volume, water temperature, and nitrogen and phosphorus concentrations at a daily timestep. Variations of the inflow.csv file were created to simulate different land use change scenarios, as represented by changes in the concentration of filterable reactive phosphorus (PHS_frp); files appended with "twoP", "fourP", and "sixP" and PHS_frp concentrations that are 2, 4, or 6 times the concentration in the baseline model.  Each lake model also includes a surface outflow file (outflow.csv) that is based on existing GLM model calibrations for Lake Mendota and Lake Sunapee. 

For more information, we refer users to the website and publications listed below.

WEBSITE & PUBLICATIONS
Carey, C.C., and K.J. Farrell. 13 August 2017. Macrosystems EDDIE: Cross-Scale Interactions. Macrosystems EDDIE Module 2, Version 2. http://module2.macrosystemseddie.org.

Farrell, K.J., & C.C. Carey. 2018. Power, pitfalls, and potential for integrating computational literacy into undergraduate ecology courses. Ecology and Evolution 8: 7744-7751. DOI: 10.1002/ece3.4363

Carey, C. C. and Gougis, R. D. 2017. Simulation modeling of lakes in undergraduate and graduate classrooms increases comprehension of climate change concepts and interest in computational tools. Journal of Science Education and Technology 26: 1-11. DOI: 10.1007/s10956-016-9644-2

NOTES AND COMMENTS
Cosgrove, B. A., Lohmann, D., Mitchell, K. E., Houser, P. R., Wood, E. F., Schaake, J. C., Robock A., Marshall, C., Sheffield, J., Duan, Q., Luo, L., Higgins, R. W., Pinker, R. T., Tarpley, J. D., & Meng, J. (2003). Real-time and retrospective forcing in the North American Land Data Assimilation System (NLDAS) project. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 108(D22).

Hipsey, M. R., L.C. Bruce, and D.P. Hamilton. 2013. Aquatic Ecodynamics (AED) model library and science manual. Draft v4, The University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia. 34 pp. Available: http://aed.see.uwa.edu.au/research/models/aed/Download/AED_ScienceManual_v4_draft.pdf

Hipsey, M. R., L.C. Bruce, and D.P. Hamilton. 2014. GLM- General Lake Model: Model overview and user information. AED Report #26, The University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia. 42 pp. Available: http://aed.see.uwa.edu.au/research/models/GLM/ 

Read, J.S., and L.A. Winslow. 2016. glmtools R package v.0.14.6. Available: https://github.com/USGS-R/glmtools 

Winslow, L.A., and J.S. Read. 2016. GLMr R package v.3.1.15 and GLMr R package default files. GLMr: A General Lake Model (GLM) base package. DOI: 10.5281/zenodo.595574